---
title: Foundations for a Science of Transcendent Realities
version: v1.0
author: Rev. Thomas J. Pulickal
tags:
- phenomenology
---

## What is real?
Many scientists today chuckle at what they consider the silly beliefs of prior generations and pious people around the world: beliefs in the existence of God, angels, the spiritual soul, life after death, and immaterial reality in general. The objects of these beliefs are *a priori* taken to be unreal, and they therefore bristle at its striking ubiquity across time and space and its popularity even in this advanced age. This is backwards. An honest inquiry must begin with the *fact*. Human beings experience the immaterial, transcendent, or what shall be called *mystery*. This fact is independent of whether such experienced mystery is *real*, which is a word whose meaning we have to explore.

For example, a person experiences God calling him to a certain action. Afterwards, he doubts whether the call was *real* or whether he was imagining it. The call was a phenomenon that presented itself as something lacking materiality by its very nature (assuming it was not experienced as an audible voice). Now, he seeks to know whether or not he should trust the phenomenon, whether it was really God who was calling him or his own mind. Notably, he does not doubt that he experienced *something*. This is the fact. The interpretation of the fact is up in the air, but the fact has its feet on the ground.

Was this phenomenon *real*? Let us begin with the viewpoint of materialists and work our way from there. Perhaps only that which is sensible by us and others is real. There are, however, unsensible things, such as UV radiation, that affect the sensible world, and it seems right that we should extend the privilege of being real to them as well. It might be argued that UV radiation too is sensible, just in a different or indirect way. To simplify matters, let us assume that we had superhuman senses that could see UV rays, feel magnetic forces, and in general sense every kind of matter and energy in the universe. Then, could we conclude that reality is identical with the sensible? The conception of reality still seems too narrow. We also have the laws of physics, such as the conservation of momentum or entropy, which are unsensible in principle. Even more, the quantum wave function that describes the probability of finding a particle somewhere is undoubtedly real and yet elusive. Unlike a sound wave, it does not travel through any medium, and unlike an electromagnetic wave, it is not a wave of any kind of energy -- just sheer probability. This wave function could not be detected even by superhuman senses, and yet it affects everything. It seems that at best we can say that something is real if it has measurable effects. 

The idea that "something is real if it has measurable effects" seems like a good candidate for defining reality. The only problem is that the "if" here serves merely to verify its being real and not to provide the basis or condition for its being real. It is like saying, "A celestial body is a star if it twinkles." This statement means, "I know a celestial body is a star if I see it twinkle." However, the more insightful statement would be, "A celestial body twinkles *because* it is a star," which is the reverse of the earlier statement. When we carry this logic over to the original statement, "Something is real if it has measurable effects," we see that the better statement would be, "Something has measurable effects *because* it is real." Of course, this tells us nothing about what makes something real but only about measurable effects and where they come from. Nevertheless, we know at least this: whenever there are measurable effects, there is a real cause.

Therefore the man from earlier who experienced God calling him can be sure that the experience was real insofar as it has a real cause. Unfortunately, this does not give him any peace, as he wants to know what that real cause was in particular. Was it God? Was it his fears? Was it an inspirational talk he heard the day prior? To discover this he has to examine the characteristics of what he experienced.

## Scientific assessment of transcendent experience
All scientific knowledge is the organization and abstraction of the phenomenal world. To test this, work backwards from any scientific theory. Take special relativity, for example, which is Einstein's theory that explains how time dilates and lengths contract at high velocities. What was the phenomena on which this theory was based? It came from measuring the speed of light. The [Fizeau experiment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizeau_experiment) in 1851 puzzled physicists because it showed that light did not speed up much when it was sent through water moving in the same direction. They expected it to be `the normal speed of light in water + the speed of the water`, just like how you speed up if you were running through an airport and continued running on the moving walk-way -- your speed + the speed of the walkway. Instead, Fizeau observed it to be `the speed of light in water + only a fraction of the speed of the water`. This is what the phenomenal world, the world of our experiences, tells us about itself. Scientists take this world and try to find its patterns, its laws, its interconnections, and its structure. Every single scientific theory ultimately comes from phenomena and is validated against phenomena for the purpose of making sense of phenomena.

Scientists may take issue with studying transcendent experience because it is not material, but we have already indicated that this is not an adequate criterion. First of all, it belongs to the phenomenal world universally and therefore cannot be ignored by science. Moreover, to say that it has measurable effects would be an understatement. Religious notions concerning immaterial realities have shaped most of human history, which is to say, they have measurable effects upon human beings and have contributed substantially to our present social context. The reality of this cause of measurable effects cannot be in question. However, we *can* question what the praying man spoken of earlier questioned: what kind of real cause has produced these measurable effects? To answer this question, we have to examine the experience and discover its essential characteristics.

An authentic experience of being called by God does not carry with it the character of materiality or at least of being limited to materiality. This is true in general with transcendent experience and perhaps even its very definition. It can be seen clearly, for example, in the transcendent experience of love. Even when biochemical explanations are provided for love, it does not adequately explain the phenomenon. Evolutionary theories fail to explain why a lover would die for the beloved, which cannot be a naturally selectable quality, even though it belongs to the very essence of love. Whenever attempts are made to reduce transcendent experience to material causes, the resulting incongruity becomes almost comical.[^1] In the attempts to explain love through material causes, they first redefine love as being something fundamentally material and then celebrate having arrived at its total explanation. We are more interested in the original, non-ideologically contaminated primitives of human experience, the bases from which science is formed and the final test of its validity. Therefore, we simply acknowledge that the authentic experience of being called by God is intrinsically a transcendent experience. 

What constitutes an inauthentic experience of being called by God? Presumably, it is its lack of transcendence. Once again, let us draw from the comparison with love. If a woman is trying to decide whether to marry a man and becomes keenly aware through self-reflection and the aid of her trusted friends that she is being driven almost entirely by physical and emotional forces, she should proceed with caution. This caution is, in a sense, a scientific discovery which comes from the age-old study of human experience. Though not found in textbooks, it is passed down through countless stories and validated by observation of the imprudent. She will question herself: "Is this truly love or merely attraction?" Put differently, "Is this the experience of the transcendent or merely biochemistry, classical conditioning, etc?" The same question appears in the case of religious experiences. If the person finds material causes that wholly or mostly explain the phenomenon, they exercise caution. None of this is to say that material causes are bad. Rather, the wisdom of the millennia and of his own life experience, has taught man that material causes can be fickle, whereas transcendent causes are steady and edifying (i.e. they build up the person over time). 

Modern science distinguishes itself in part by its falsifiability. This is a brilliant notion because it purifies intellectual activity of a kind of self-referentiality and self-justification that lacks any basis in reality. For a theory to be considered scientific, it must be falsifiable in principle, which roughly means that there is some practical way to attempt to disprove it. For example, I could completely disprove Einstein's theory of special relativity by somehow getting a single photon to travel faster than 299,792.458 km/s. We should point out that falsifiability does not mean that one could argue with a theory, as this could go on ad infinitum in both directions. Falsification violates one of the theory's necessary predictions or effects. I could disprove macro evolutionary theories if I found a single primate fossil that was 1 billion years old because the gradual emergence of increasingly complex organisms is an essential consequence of the theory. In our case, we must see whether the claim or theory that human beings encounter transcendent reality is falsifiable. It most certainly is. If a properly transcendent experience could be entirely reproduced in a psychologically healthy person by a material cause, this would falsify the claim because the very meaning of a transcendent experience is that it transcends materiality.

## Falsifying transcendence
One material substance that could be used to falsify the transcendence of so-called transcendent experiences is psychedelics. Psilocin acts on serotonin receptors in the brain and produces a variety of subjective experiences, many of which are experienced by the subject as being transcendent. OH DEAR - big area! 

[^1]: Here, "material cause" does not refer to the Aristotelian notion but to matter or energy.