---
title: "Intuition and Proof for Area Under a Polynomial"
author: Rev. Thomas J. Pulickal
tags:
- math
---

## Intuition
We are told that $ \int_{a}^{b} x^{2} \, dx  = \frac{b^3}{3} - \frac{a^3}{3} $. The question I wrestle with is what this really means and how we arrive at this. One way to approach it is to just reverse the derivative, but this assumes a lot and does not flow from intuition. Suppose we abandon all of this and start from scratch. What is the problem we are trying to solve?

Suppose you are timing a car with a stopwatch. It starts at rest and the accelerates at a steady rate. You clock it moving it at a speed of 1 mile per minute after the first minute, a speed of 2.2.25 miles per minute 30 seconds later, and then 4 miles per minute at the second minute (240 mph -- it's a very special car). Now you want to determine how much distance it crossed between minutes 1 and 2. If it was moving a constant speed, this would be easy. For example, a car that travels 1 mile each minute for 10 minutes travels a total of 10 miles (10x1). When the speed is changing, it is more difficult to determine the total distance. 

For simplicity, you could pretend that it traveled at 1 mile per minute for the first 30 seconds until you measured it 30 seconds later, at which point it jumped to 2.25 miles per minute and then it jumped 4 miles per minute. One estimate of the distance of the traveled, therefore, would be 0.5 minutes x 1 mile per hour + 0.5 minutes x 2.25 miles per hour = 1.625 miles. In reality, it traveled farther because it was going 4 miles per minute by the end of minute 1, not 2.25 miles per minute, as we assume here. You can also overshoot the estimate by using 2.25 miles per minute for the first 30 seconds and 4 miles per minute for the second 30 seconds. This would give you 3.125 miles. That is a big difference, but the answer lies somewhere between the two. Notice what we did here. We divided the time into even chunks of 30 seconds, measured the speed again after each time chunk, and then assumed a constant speed for the duration of that time chunk. This could be expressed mathematically as 0.5 minutes x speed1 + 0.5 minutes x speed2. In our overestimation, we used speed1 = speed at 1.5 minutes = 2.25 miles per minute and speed2 = speed at 2 minutes = 4 miles per minute. Why 1.5 minutes? That is 1 chunk size (0.5 minutes) after our start time (1 minute). Why 2 seconds? That is 2 chunk sizes (0.5 minutes x 2 = 1 minute) after our start time (1 minute). In general, the *n*th speed speed_n = the speed at (start_time + chunk_size x chunk_number). Let us call the time in minutes $t$, the speed $f(t)$ the start time $a$, the end time $b$, the chunk size $\delta$, and the chunk number $\lambda$. To get an estimate of distance, we just need to add speed1 x chunk_size + speed2 * chunk_size + ... = $ f(a + \delta \cdot \lambda) $ for the time interval between $a$ and $b$.  Moreover, if we make the chunk sizes smaller, we will get a more accurate estimate because that will be equivalent of measuring the speed more frequently during the 1 minute.

This problem is set up nicely so that the speed is the square of the minute we are in. Speed at minute 1 = 1 mile per minute, at minute 2 = 4 miles per minute. speed = $f(t) = t^2$. Graphically, the distance we are looking for is the "area under the curve". Take

